Populate `README.md` for `diff-containers` package. (#19)
input-output-hk/anti-diffs: diff-containers/README.md

# diff-containers

This package implements difference datatypes for container types. Currently,
there is only one such implemented difference datatype for `Data.Map.Strict`.

## Differences on `Data.Map`s

A difference datatype for maps is defined and implemented in the
`Data.Map.Diff.Strict` module. A key property of our definition of diffs is that

> diffs can not only combined/summed, they can also be inverted and summed

Author: Done

together, which facilitates *subtraction* of diffs. Our definition of diffs is

> not only a `Semigroup` and a `Monoid`, it is also a `Group`.

Author: Hmm it may have been a confusing statement on my part, but a diff does have an identity element. It's diff entries that do not have any instances, because we don't need them to define the instances for diff histories and diffs themselves

# diff-containers

This package implements difference datatypes for container types. Currently,
there is only one such implemented difference datatype for `Data.Map.Strict`.

## Differences on `Data.Map`s

A difference datatype for maps is defined and implemented in the
`Data.Map.Diff.Strict` module. A key property of our definition of diffs is that
diffs can not only be combined/summed, they can also be inverted and summed
together, which facilitates *subtraction* of diffs. Our definition of diffs is

> not only a `Semigroup` and a `Monoid`, it is also a `Group`.

Reviewer: I wonder if it'd make sense to include links to each of these algebraic data structures (maybe to Wikipedia).

Author: Done

The goals for our definition of diffs are twofold:
1. Provide definitions that adhere to the type class laws for `Semigroup`,
   `Monoid` and `Group`.

> 2. Applying diffs to maps should have a nice semantics.

Reviewer: Hmmm, maybe we should elaborate on what a "nice semantics" is. Do we mean sound?

Author: Done

An overview of the sections in this document:

* Section [1) High-level overview](#high-level-overview) provides a high-level
  overview of diffs, how to create them, and how to apply them.
* Section [2) A first attempt at implementing
  diffs](#2-a-first-attempt-at-implementing-diffs) describes a straightforward
  way to implement diffs, and where this goes wrong if we try to define a
  `Group` instance.
* Section [3) Implementing diffs with
  inverses](#3-implementing-diffs-with-inverses) describes how we implement
  diffs to facilitate a `Group` instance.
* Section [4) Applying diffs with inverses: positivity and
  normality](#4-applying-diffs-with-inverses-positivity-and-normality) describes
  how applying diffs can fail, but which can be solved by guaranteeing the
  positivity and normality properties.

### 1) High-level overview

For each of the key-value pairs in a map, the difference type will keep track of

> whether a value is to be inserted or deleted:

Reviewer: We should think how to prevent the code snippets presented here from bitrotting. In general we should try to avoid writing any code, but that's not always possible :) Maybe we could add a checklist to the PR template that urges the author to check the docs? Or we could move some of these explanations into a literate haskell file, or something like `*.Tutorial.hs`. All in all, these activities are outside the scope of this PR, so please dismiss this comment after reading :)

Author: See https://github.com/input-output-hk/anti-diffs/issues/25

```haskell
newtype Diff k v = Diff {- omitted -}

data DiffEntry v =
    Insert !v
  | Delete !v
  {- omitted for now -}
```

One method of constructing a diff is to compute the difference between two maps.
Other methods include creating diffs from maps and lists directly:

```haskell
diff :: (Ord k, Eq v) => Map k v -> Map k v -> Diff k v

fromMap :: Map k (DiffEntry v) -> Diff k v
fromList :: Ord k => [(k, DiffEntry v)] -> Diff k v
```

Diffs can be applied to maps to obtain new maps. For diffs constructed using
`diff`, the following `property` also holds:

```haskell
unsafeApplyDiff :: Ord k => Map k v -> Diff k v -> Map k v

property :: Map k v -> Map k v -> Bool
property = unsafeApplyDiff m1 (diff m1 m2) == m2
```

### 2) A first attempt at implementing diffs

A straightfoward to represent differences on maps is to keep track of the most
recent change for each key in the map.

```haskell
type Diff_ k v = Diff_ (Map k (Delta_ v))
data Delta_ = Insert_ !v | Delete_ !v
```

Diffs can then be summed (or combined/`mappend`ed) through a
`Semigroup`/`Monoid` instance that behaves like a pair-wise `Last` monoid.

```haskell

>    fromList [(1, Insert_ 54), (2, DDelete 42)                ]

Reviewer: I think it's the first time we use `DDelete`. Shouldn't we introduce it first?

Author: My mistake, it should be `Delete_`!

<> fromList [                 (2, Insert_ 17), (3, DDelete 1)]
== fromList [(1, Insert_ 54), (2, Insert_ 17), (3, DDelete 1)]
```

What if we want to remove diffs, i.e. through subtraction provided by a `Group`
instance? In the current definition, there is no way to recover information
about previous changes, since we only have the last/most recent change. In
particular, we would like to be able to have the following:

```haskell
   fromList [(1, Insert_ 54), (2, DDelete 42)                ]
<> fromList [                 (2, Insert_ 17), (3, DDelete 1)]

> ~~ fromList [                 (2, Insert_ 17), (3, DDelete 1)]

Reviewer: Is `~~` the subtraction op? Maybe we need to clarify this.

Reviewer: Also we should probably add some parenthesis or talk about precedence: ie what is true in the code above `(a <> b) ~~` or `a <> (b ~~ c)`?

Author: According to the documentation, `(<>)` is right associative and `(~~)` is left associative with a higher precedence. However, since these are monoids (and `(~~)` is an alias for `\x y -> x <> invert y`), the actual parentheses don't matter for the result because of the associativity property

Author: I now see that the adding parentheses to the first sum makes the example more clear, so I've updated this

== fromList [(1, Insert_ 54), (2, DDelete 42)                ]
```

> The current definition of diffs is not sufficient, however.

Reviewer: Maybe we should expand on why this is not sufficient.

First, we start by adding inverse elements to the definition of `DiffEntry`. One
may think `Insert` and `Delete` are already inverses of one another, and that
would be correct in terms of adhering to the type class laws, but it would have
adverse effects on the semantics of applying diffs to maps. Consider what would
happen if we were to consider `Insert` and `Delete` inverses in the following
example. Ignore diff histories for now:

```haskell
d1 = fromList [(0, Delete 17)]
d2 = fromList [(0, Insert 42)]
d3 = d1 <> d2 = fromList []
```

Applying `d3` to a map would behave like the identity function. Applying `d1`
and `d2` consecutively would not behave like the identity function, as it would
map `0` to `42`. Through some abuse of the definition of distributivity, we can
say that applying diffs does not distribute over the summing of diffs.

Instead, we add explicit inverse constructors for both `Insert` and `Delete`. We
do not make `Semigroup`/`Monoid`/`Group` instances for diff entries, however. We
shall see that we only need these 4 constructors in order to provide the
instances for diff histories.

```haskell
data DiffEntry v =
    Insert !v
  | Delete !v

>   | UnsafeAntiInsert !v -- ^ Unsafe!

Reviewer: Maybe we should explain why these are unsafe.

Author: Done

h1 = fromList [Insert 1, UnsafeAntiDelete 2, UnsafeAntiInsert 3]
h2 = fromList [Delete 2, Insert 3, Insert 3]
h3 = h1 <> h2 = [Insert 1, Delete 2, Insert 3]
```

How do we invert diff histories? The type class laws that a `Group` instance
should adhere to give us a clue:

```haskell
-- left inverse
a <> invert a == mempty
-- right inverse
invert a <> a == mempty
```

Given that inverse diff entries cancel each other out, inverting a diff history should invert all diff entries and reverse their order. See this example:

```haskell
h        = fromList [Insert 1, Delete 2, Delete 3, Insert 4]
invert h = fromList [UnsafeAntiInsert 4, UnsafeAntiDelete 3, UnsafeAntiDelete 2, UnsafeAntiInsert 1]

invert h <> h == mempty
h <> invert h == mempty
```

Summing of diffs follows from pairwise summing the inner diff histories.
Inverting diffs follows from inverting each inner diff history.

### 4) Applying diffs with inverses: positivity and normality

It is an unfortunate side effect of facilitating a `Group` instance for diffs
that we can get into situations where applying diffs will fail or produce wrong
results due to diffs containing internally unresolved sums and subtractions. The

> responsibility of downstream code is to ensure that diffs that are applied are

Reviewer: Why is this a responsibility of the downstream code? Can't we maintain these invariants?

Author: Unfortunately, I don't think we can: applying any diff that has any `UnsafeAnti*` constructors can go wrong, and there's no way from keeping downstream code from misusing subtraction/inversion to create unsafe diffs that contain these constructors. Unless, maybe, by running expensive and non-trivial run-time checks.

I could add assertions to the code that do check these invariants in tests, but they should probably not be enabled in "production mode". I'll add a separate issue for this.

Author: See https://github.com/input-output-hk/anti-diffs/issues/26

both *positive* and *normal*. If that is the case, then applying diffs will
never go wrong.

* Positivity: a positive diff contains only `Insert`s and `Delete`s.
* Normality: a normal diff has resolved all sums and subtrations internally,
  i.e., there are no consecutive diff entries in a diff history that can still
  be cancelled out.

> Import to note: a positive diff is by definition also a normal diff. Normality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note: a positive diff is by definition also a normal diff. Normality
```

inversion operation, but that could be costly.

If positivity and normality are guaranteed, then `applyDiff` will always return a `Right` result, and `unsafeApplyDiff` will never throw an error.

```haskell
applyDiff :: Ord k => Map k v -> Diff k v -> Either () (Map k v)
unsafeApplyDiff :: Ord k => Map k v -> Diff k v -> Map k v
```

A number of definitions in the Haskell modules are annotated with PRECONDITION,
INVARIANT and POSTCONDITION. Use these and the type class laws for `Semigroup`,
`Monoid` and `Group` (which hold given preconditions) to ensure that applied
diffs are always both positive and normal. This should not be too complex

* Diffing maps creates diffs that are both positive and normal.
* Summing preverses normality and positivity.
* Empty diffs are both normal and positive.
* Inversion preserves normality.
* Subtraction preserves positivity if we only subtract diffs that we know are in
  a sum. For example:

  ```haskell
  (d1 <> ... <> di <> dj <> ... <> dn) <> invert (dj <> ... <> dn) == d1 <> ... <> di
  invert (d1 <> ... <> di) <> (d1 <> ... <> di <> dj <> ... <> dn) == dj <> ... <> dn
  ```

> It is important not to forget that these sum operations are not commutative.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to remember that these sum operations are not commutative.
```
